Add dqlite developer documentation and improve dqlite related code comments (#17105)
canonical/lxd: doc/reference/dqlite-internals.md

---
relatedlinks: "[Canonical&#32;Dqlite](https://canonical.com/dqlite), [Dqlite&#32;GitHub](https://github.com/canonical/dqlite)"
---

(dqlite-internals)=
# Dqlite internals

Dqlite (distributed SQLite) implements a replicated SQLite database by combining the SQLite engine with a Raft-based consensus layer. Each LXD daemon (cluster member) runs a Dqlite node which exposes a SQLite-like API backed by a Raft replicated state machine. A single leader handles writes; followers apply replicated log entries and serve reads depending on configuration.

## Raft

Raft is a consensus algorithm that ensures a cluster of nodes can agree on a sequence of state machine commands even in the presence of failures. Raft handles leader election, log replication, and safety guarantees. For more information on the Raft algorithm, see the [original Raft paper](https://raft.github.io/raft.pdf).

> Raft nodes in Dqlite move between four runtime states: `RAFT_UNAVAILABLE`, `RAFT_FOLLOWER`, `RAFT_CANDIDATE` and `RAFT_LEADER`. Followers are passive: they accept `AppendEntries` RPCs (remote procedure calls) from an active leader and reset an election timer; when a follower's randomized election timeout elapses without leader contact it becomes a candidate, increments its term and sends `RequestVote` RPCs to gather votes. A candidate becomes leader after receiving votes from a majority of voting servers and then starts replicating log entries to followers using `AppendEntries` (heartbeats are empty `AppendEntries` used to maintain authority).

Reviewer: Since the paragraphs on line 14 and 16 do not seem to be specific to LXD, is this level of detail about DQlite/Raft necessary in the LXD documentation? We want to avoid documenting upstream products for them in detail, and prefer to summarize / link to their documentation/resources instead as much as possible. How much can we pare this down to what's important for LXD users?

Author: This is meant to serve as developer documentation, similar to the OVN internals and VM live migration implementation pages.

Author: These paragraphs summarize information gathered from the Dqlite docs, source code, and the Raft white paper, in a concise format that isn't directly available upstream, while also providing a mapping Raft roles to LXD cluster roles. IMHO, this information is valuable to include. 

I'd also like to expand the practice of adding internals/developer documentation to reduce cognitive load when reasoning about different concepts in LXD. Perhaps there is a better location for this type of documentation?

Author: I'd be fine with including this information as code comments instead of a dedicated doc page. Open to suggestions :)

---
relatedlinks: "[Canonical&#32;Dqlite](https://canonical.com/dqlite), [Dqlite&#32;GitHub](https://github.com/canonical/dqlite)"
---

(dqlite-internals)=
# Dqlite internals

Dqlite (distributed SQLite) implements a replicated SQLite database by combining the SQLite engine with a Raft-based consensus layer. Each LXD daemon (cluster member) runs a Dqlite node which exposes a SQLite-like API backed by a Raft replicated state machine. A single leader handles writes; followers apply replicated log entries and serve reads depending on configuration.

## Raft

[Raft](https://raft.github.io/) is a consensus algorithm that ensures a cluster of nodes can agree on a sequence of state machine commands even in the presence of failures. Raft handles leader election, log replication, safety, and membership changes.

## Dqlite Raft implementation

> Raft nodes in Dqlite move between four runtime states: `RAFT_UNAVAILABLE`, `RAFT_FOLLOWER`, `RAFT_CANDIDATE` and `RAFT_LEADER`. Followers are passive: they accept `AppendEntries` RPCs (remote procedure calls) from an active leader and reset an election timer; when a follower's randomized election timeout elapses without leader contact it becomes a candidate, increments its term and sends `RequestVote` RPCs to gather votes. A candidate becomes leader after receiving votes from a majority of voting servers and then starts replicating log entries to followers using `AppendEntries` (heartbeats are empty `AppendEntries` used to maintain authority).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Raft nodes in Dqlite move between four runtime states: `RAFT_UNAVAILABLE`, `RAFT_FOLLOWER`, `RAFT_CANDIDATE` and `RAFT_LEADER`. Leaders coordinate log replication among followers and send out regular heartbeats to maintain authority. Followers listen for heartbeats and participate in electing a new leader when necessary. 
```

Do you think this suggested revision provides enough information for an LXD developer, or is the detailed information in your version necessary?

Author: I prefer the more detailed version. Since this is developer documentation, we don't need to obfuscate details. There is external documentation we can link to, but I want to save other developers (and my future self) from needing to parse information spread across many sources.

> Dqlite randomizes the election timeout (default 1000ms, randomized between 1x–2x) and uses a shorter heartbeat timeout (default 100ms) so that leaders periodically prevent elections. The implementation supports pre-vote to reduce unnecessary disruptions caused by isolated or slow nodes, and provides explicit leadership transfer primitives (`TimeoutNow` / `raft_transfer`) to hand over leadership without a full election; leaders also step down if they lose contact with a majority of voters. Roles such as `RAFT_VOTER`, `RAFT_STANDBY` and `RAFT_SPARE` control whether a server participates in quorum and elections, which is used to manage membership changes and promotions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The election timeout is randomized, but always shorter than the heartbeat interval. Features such as pre-vote and explicit leadership transfer ensure reliable handover even if all servers cannot vote. Leaders also step down if they lose contact with a majority of voters. The {ref}`dqlite-internals-raft-roles` control whether a server participates in quorum and elections.
```

Author: The addition of the `ref` is a great suggestion too :)

For more information on the Canonical Dqlite Raft implementation, see [`dqlite/src/raft.h`](https://github.com/canonical/dqlite/blob/main/src/raft.h) and [Dqlite replication](https://canonical.com/dqlite/docs/explanation/replication).

> ### Dqlite raft roles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(dqlite-internals-raft-roles)=
### Dqlite raft roles
```
